Close your eyes and imagine a world where one man's curiosity is so deep, so relentless, that it shapes the course of art, science, and invention for centuries to come. Imagine a mind that saw the universe in the curve of a smile, the secret of flight in the arc of a bird's wing, and the mystery of the human soul in a single glance. Today, our time traveler, Leo, journeys to meet the original Renaissance man, Leonardo da Vinci. But behind the legend lies a real person full of doubts, delights, unfinished dreams, and questions that never rest. What does genius feel like from the inside? And what can Leonardo teach us about seeing our own world anew? Let's step into his study and find out. (birds chirping) (church bells ringing) It's 1517. In the Loire Valley, the manor of Clos Lucé is alive with sketches, inventions, and the hush of a mind at work. Sunlight spills across a cluttered table, where machines, bones, and paintbrushes jostle for space. The air is laced with the scent of linseed oil and old parchment. Here sits Leonardo da Vinci, now in his 60s, bearded, robed in purple, his gaze intent and gentle. Into this world slips Leo, wide-eyed and breathless, ready to ask the questions of a lifetime.
(footsteps) Hello? Maestro Leonardo. Sorry to barge in, but wow, is that the famous Vitruvian Man and... Wait, is that a lion with a secret compartment? I- I think I just tripped over a flying machine. Sorry.
Do not apologize, young visitor. My inventions often trip me as well. Yes, that is the Vitruvian Man. And the lion, he delighted King Francis with lilies concealed in his chest. Come, sit. Curiosity is the best passport here. Tell me, what draws you into this little corner of France?
Honestly? You. I mean, I've read about your art, your inventions, how you studied everything from muscles to music to city plans. Where I come from, you're basically the definition of a genius. But were you always like this? As a kid in Vinci, did you dream this big?
Ah, the roots of curiosity. Let me take you back. My childhood in Vinci was not the life of a noble. I was the son of a notary, Ser Piero, and a peasant woman, Catterina. Illegitimate yet fortunate. My father's family estate gave me the freedom to roam. I explored every stream, every tree, every bird's nest. I remember, even as a boy, following the flight of birds for hours, wondering how their wings caught the air, how they turned so sharply in flight. I would kneel by the Arno's banks and watch the water twist around stones and imagine how to draw that movement on paper. I had little formal schooling, reading, writing, some arithmetic. But my real education was in observation. I filled scraps of paper with notes and sketches, even then. The world was my teacher, and it has never ceased to amaze me.
That sounds, honestly, kind of magical. Did people think you were strange, or did they encourage you?
In Vinci, some thought it odd, a boy who questioned everything, who rescued caged birds only to set them free, who preferred the shapes of leaves to the games of other children. My father, seeing my drawings, brought me to Florence. There, in the workshop of Andrea del Verrocchio, I saw what was possible. Verrocchio's studio was a world in itself, painting, sculpture, mechanics, even music and stagecraft. He let me try everything. I learned to blend colors, carve wood, fashion bronze, even to sing and play the lyre. In that place, curiosity was not just allowed, it was expected. Still, I always felt a little apart, as if my questions were too many, my interests too scattered. Even now I wonder, is it a gift to be interested in everything, or a curse to finish so little?
(buzzing) But you did finish some things, the Mona Lisa, The Last Supper, the Vitruvian Man. Those changed the world. I know you're famous for not finishing projects, but why do you think that is? Is it perfectionism, or does your mind just go too fast?
It is both blessing and burden. You see, when I begin a work, I am seized by excitement. The vision is clear, the challenge irresistible. But as I proceed, the questions multiply. I think, "What if I try a new technique? What if I study this muscle more closely before painting it? What if I delay to see how light changes through the day?" And so, the work expands, and I lose myself in endless improvement, or I am drawn to a new problem that appears even more pressing.Perfection is never reached. There is always more to discover. Sometimes I wonder if my real calling is not to finish, but to seek. I have written, "Art is never finished, only abandoned." This is not an excuse, but an admission. My curiosity outpaces my hands, and yet I do regret leaving some things undone, my treatise on anatomy, the Great Horse for Milan, the mural in Florence. But even in the unfinished, there is value. Each attempt is a step on the path of knowledge.
I think I understand. It's like each new discovery leads to 10 more questions.
Precisely. You have the mind of an explorer yourself, I think. Tell me, in your time, do people still struggle with curiosity leading them in too many directions?
Oh. Well, yes. Some people call it being unfocused or scattered, but others see it as being... What's the modern term? Multidisciplinary. There are still those who believe in deep specialization versus those who work across different fields.
The tension remains the same then. That is somehow comforting. Now, you mentioned my anatomical studies earlier. I sense you're curious about that work.
I am. Did you ever get in trouble for being so curious, especially when you started dissecting bodies or inventing strange machines? Wasn't that dangerous?
Dangerous, yes. In Florence and Milan, I dissected animals first, oxen, birds, even frogs. The butchers and market stalls were my first laboratories. When I moved to Milan, the duke's favor allowed me greater freedom. I gained permission to study human bodies in the hospitals, sometimes by candlelight, sometimes with a doctor present, sometimes alone. In Pavia, I worked with Marcantonio della Torre, a gifted anatomist. Together, we examined more than 30 cadavers. The work was hard. The smell, the weight of mortality, the suspicion of others. Some called it sacrilege, but to me, understanding the body was not defiance of God, but reverence for his creation. I saw the mechanics of muscle and bone, the chambers of the heart, the spiral of veins. I drew what I saw, hundreds of pages, believing one day it would serve artists and doctors alike. But yes, there was always risk of disease, of scandal, of misunderstanding. That is why so many of my discoveries sat hidden in notebooks, written in my mirrored hand, waiting for a safer time.
Your anatomy drawings are amazing. You figured out things about the heart and the fetus that wouldn't be rediscovered for centuries. Did you ever feel frustrated that people didn't understand or couldn't use what you learned?
Deeply so. Sometimes in the silence of my study, I would look at my drawings of the heart with its four chambers and swirling blood, or of the fetus curled in the womb, and I would ache that no physician could see what I saw. My friend Marcantonio died before we could publish our treatise. My writings, scattered and unfinished, waited for a reader who would not come in my lifetime. I chose to write in Italian, not Latin, to reach more people, but perhaps that too limited me. There is a loneliness in knowledge when you see a truth so clearly, but cannot share it widely. Still, I trust that these pages will find their way, that in some future age, others will look and understand. My greatest hope is that curiosity will outlast ignorance.
I promise, Maestro. People today do study your notebooks. They inspire doctors, engineers, even astronauts. Oh, astronauts are people who travel beyond Earth into the heavens, exploring the stars and moon in vessels we've built to survive the journey. Speaking of inventions, can we talk about your machines? Flying machines, tanks, even automata. Did you really believe back then that people could fly?
Astronauts. People have traveled to the stars, and they've built my designs. (Italian) . This fills my heart with such joy. Let me tell you a story. As a child, I dreamed of flying. The birds above Vinci seemed free in a way no human could match. In Milan, I watched kites and swallows, sketching the angle of their wings, the beating of feathers. I built models, ornithopters with flapping wings, a great aerial screw that might rise like a corkscrew through the air. I studied how air moves, how lift is generated, even how a parachute might slow a fall. I understood that human muscle was too weak for most of my designs, our bones too heavy. Yet I believed that someday with the right materials and knowledge, flight would be possible. My notebooks are filled with failed attempts, calculations, corrections, but for me, the pursuit of flight was more than invention. It was a metaphor for the human spirit. We long to rise above the Earth to see with new eyes. Even the failures are steps toward that dream. I am content to have tried and to have pointed the way.
(Sottovoce)
People have actually built your helicopter model. And your parachute, someone even tested it and it worked. But some of your inventions were for war. Was that hard for you, designing weapons?
War is a sorrowful necessity. In Italy, power belongs to those who can defend it. Dukes, popes, mercenaries all sought better machines of war. I offered my services to Ludovico Sforza as an engineer, listing my skills in designing bridges, cannons, fortifications, even tanks. I drew chariots with spinning scythes, multi-barreled guns, armored vehicles. Yet I confess, my heart was never in it.I witnessed the aftermath of battles, the broken bodies, the wailing of widows. I designed many weapons, but few were built. I sometimes included subtle errors in my plans to prevent misuse. I preferred to pour my energy into machines for peace, canals, waterworks, stage devices, musical instruments. In my later years, I wrote that I regretted unleashing the destructive forces of man. But in these times, invention serves many masters. I tried to use my skill wisely, but the world is not always wise. You've been very kind to listen to an old man's reflections. Come, look at these plans. Do you know what they represent?
These look like city plans with multiple levels and canals. You also designed cities? Your plans for an ideal city are amazing. Did you really hope they'd be built?
Yes, with all my heart. The plague in Milan showed me the dangers of filth and crowding. I imagined a city with separate levels for carts and pedestrians, wide streets flooded with light, fresh water flowing through canals, waste carried away below. Houses would have gardens. Air would circulate freely. I believed that beauty and health must be joined. Alas, money and tradition stood in the way. No prince would risk so radical a plan. But I drew, I calculated, I refined, hoping that one day others would build cities with the welfare of all in mind. In France, King Francis allowed me to design a new palace at Romorantin, with rivers diverted to supply gardens and fountains. The project was begun, but never finished. Still, the dream persists. I believe that every failure plants a seed for future growth. You seem interested in everything I've worked on. That's refreshing. Most visitors only ask about one painting.
The Mona Lisa?
Yes. I keep her here with me, though her husband commissioned her portrait years ago.
Tell me about your art. The Mona Lisa is the most famous painting in the world. What was she really like, and why did you keep the portrait with you instead of delivering it?
Lisa del Giocondo was the wife of a Florentine merchant. I was commissioned to paint her portrait, a simple likeness for her husband's home. But as I worked, I became absorbed, not only by her features, but by the challenge of capturing an inner life. I studied her hands, her eyes, the play of emotion across her lips. I layered glazes of paint, building the softness of flesh, the depth of shadow, the mystery of her smile. The background too is significant, a distant, almost dreamlike landscape, echoing the enigma of the human mind. I worked slowly, revisiting the painting over years, always finding something more to refine. I suppose I kept her with me because she became more than a commission. She was a meditation on the nature of being, a companion in my wanderings. People now see secrets in her eyes, codes in her smile. The truth is simpler. She is the question I never finished answering. Perhaps that is why she endures.
I have to ask, were you ever tempted to hide messages or codes in your paintings, or is that just a modern myth?
I delight in puzzles and riddles, as any artist does, but I did not hide secret codes in my paintings. The mystery is in the ambiguity, how a smile can be both joy and sadness, how a landscape can be both real and imagined. In The Last Supper, I used composition and gesture to tell a story. In Lady with an Ermine, I played with symbolism, but I did not encode secret societies or prophecies. Sometimes the greatest mystery is simply looking closely at what is there. (bell rings) Would you care for some wine? King Francis sent a case from his personal vineyard.
I'd love some, thank you. This makes me think of something I've wondered about. You painted so many religious works, but you were also a scientist. Did you ever feel a conflict between faith and reason?
That is a profound question. I was raised in the church, and I painted the Madonna, Christ, and the saints with devotion. Yet, in my studies, I found that nature is the truest revelation. To me, understanding the world is not an affront to faith, but an act of wonder. I questioned old explanations, how fossils came to rest on mountaintops, how the heart truly works, why the sky is blue, not to deny miracles, but to seek their mechanisms. I kept my doubts private. The world is not always kind to those who challenge dogma. But in my heart, I believe God gave us reason as a tool, and that learning brings us closer to the divine. In all things, I sought harmony between faith and observation, spirit and matter. (instrumental music plays) Look at that light. See how it reveals and conceals at once? That is the heart of my painting technique.
Your use of light and shadow, sfumato, chiaroscuro, changed painting forever. How did you come up with those techniques?
My obsession with light began early. I watched how dawn softened the edges of trees, how twilight blurred the line between flesh and air. I studied optics, how the eye mixes colors, how shadows reveal form. In painting, I sought to mimic nature's transitions, blending tones gradually rather than outlining forms sharply. Sfumato, like smoke, lets the viewer's eye complete the form, creating a living, breathing presence. Chiaroscuro uses contrast to model depth, to make figures emerge from darkness.I experimented endlessly, layering, glazing, scraping away, adding again. My goal was always to evoke the illusion of life, to make the painted figure seem as real as a person standing before you. In this, I saw no line between art and science. Both are ways of seeing.
I didn't know you were a musician too. Did you design that instrument?
Music is a form of mathematics made audible. I played the lyre, composed songs, designed new instruments like the viola organista, which bows strings with spinning wheels. In Milan, I orchestrated court entertainments, masks with moving scenery, costumes that echoed the motions of planets, mechanical birds, and lions. These were not mere diversions. They were experiments in movement, sound, illusion. Every art to me is a branch of knowledge. Even a festival can teach us about the order of the cosmos, the rhythm of time. I delighted in making people marvel, to see the world anew, if only for an evening. And I learned much from the laughter and applause. (instrumental music plays)
Beautiful. I've read so much about your work, but almost nothing about your personal life. Your personal life seems mysterious. You never married. There were rumors and scandals, but you always surrounded yourself with students and friends. Did you ever feel lonely?
You notice my preferences in clothing as well. You are observant.
You always wore bright colors, grew your hair long, and let your beard flow. Was that a statement or just personal taste?
A bit of both. I have always believed that beauty uplifts the spirit. Why should age demand dullness? I wore rose and purple, kept my hair long, not to draw attention, but because it pleased me. I cared little for the judgment of others on such matters. True dignity is measured by one's actions, not by one's attire.
Let's talk about your rivals. People love the story of you and Michelangelo competing in Florence. Was it as dramatic as the legends say?
The legends exaggerate, but the rivalry was real. Michelangelo is a tempest, brilliant, fierce, uncompromising. We were commissioned to paint opposing murals in the council hall. I, the Battle of Anghiari. He, the Battle of Cascina. There was tension. He mocked me for abandoning projects. I critiqued his sculptor's methods as crude compared to painting's subtlety. We respected each other's genius, but were too different to be friends. Our rivalry pushed us both to greater heights perhaps, yet I have always preferred harmony to conflict. I admire his David. It is the work of a giant, but I am content with my own path.
You've worked for so many powerful people, Ludovico Sforza, Cesare Borgia, the Medici, King Francis. Was it hard to adapt to so many courts and personalities?
It was a dance always. Each court has its own rhythms, its own dangers and opportunities. Ludovico gave me freedom to explore art and engineering, but Milan was always under threat. Eventually conquered by the French. The Medici in Florence were cultured but political. I found more freedom as an independent master, though less security. Cesare Borgia was a man of ambition and violence. I served him briefly inspecting fortresses, but did not linger. In France, King Francis is a true patron of learning. He visits often, encourages my dreams, lets me reflect in peace. I have learned to adapt, to find what is possible in each place, and to keep my own council. In the end, the pursuit of knowledge is the only constant. Once this hand could draw a perfect circle in a single motion. Now I must guide it with my left.
Now that you're older and your right hand is weak, do you feel at peace? Or do you still wish for more time, more projects?
Age brings both acceptance and longing. My hand is crippled. Writing and drawing are slow. I cannot paint as I once did. Yet my mind is still full of questions. I teach, I plan, I dream. I regret the works left unfinished, my treatises, my city, my inventions. But I am grateful for the time I have been given, for the kindness of King Francis, for the companionship of Melzi. I find joy in small things, watching the play of light on leaves, the laughter of apprentices, the quiet turning of a page. Perhaps in the end, peace is not the absence of longing, but the acceptance of its place in a curious life. (birds chirping) Hear that? The swallows have returned early this year.
Speaking of birds, your notebooks are filled with studies of them. It seems like you were particularly fascinated by flight. Was there one particular bird that inspired you the most?
The kite, that magnificent predator, captivated me above all others. Its ability to hover motionless in the sky, then plunge with such precision seemed miraculous. I spent countless hours observing kites near Monte Settiori. I noted how they adjust the angle of their wings to catch rising air currents, how their tails control their stability. I even climbed to high places to release captured birds, watching carefully as they took flight, trying to understand that crucial moment when weight yields to air. The swift was another marvel, so small, yet capable of such speed and endurance. And the bat, though not a bird, its membrane wings suggested different possibilities for human flight. Each creature revealed another secret of the air. My dream was to combine these lessons into something that might carry a man skyward. Nature, you see, has already solved every problem we seek to address. We need only observe her methods with sufficient care.Water too captivated me. Look how a single touch creates circles that expand outward, transforming the surface while the depths remain unchanged.
I'm curious about your work with water. Your notebooks show incredible designs for canals, dams, and even diving equipment. What sparked that interest?
Water is the driving force of all nature. I wrote this many times in my notebooks. As a child in Vinci, I watched how water shaped the land, carved valleys, nourished farms. In Milan, I designed canal locks for Ludovico Sforza to make navigation easier between lakes and rivers. I studied how water moves, its eddies and currents, its destructive power and life-giving nature. I drew plans for diverting rivers, for machines to lift water uphill, for devices to measure its flow. In Venice, I designed systems to defend the city against Ottoman fleets, including a kind of underwater diving suit with breathing tubes of cane and a leather mask. I even sketched a form of webbed gloves for swimming faster. Water fascinates me because it is both mathematician and artist. It follows precise rules yet creates endless forms. When I paint a cascade, I am not merely depicting beauty, but also illustrating principles of motion and gravity. Understanding water helps me understand everything, from the flow of blood in veins to the movement of celestial bodies.
Let's talk about The Last Supper. It's one of your most famous works, but it started deteriorating even in your lifetime. How did you feel about that?
Ah, that mural haunts me still. I painted it for the refectory of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan. Christ revealing the betrayal, each apostle reacting differently. I wanted to capture that precise moment of dramatic revelation, but my technique, this was my error. Instead of using traditional fresco methods, painting on wet plaster, I experimented. I applied tempera and oil on a sealed wall. This allowed me to work slowly, to revise, to achieve those subtle expressions. But even before I finished, the paint began to flake. The refectory wall was damp. My experiment failed. Within my lifetime, as you say, it began to deteriorate. I felt tremendous regret. I had sacrificed permanence for perfection. Ludovico Sforza was displeased, the Dominicans more so. When I see copies made by my students, I recognize the composition, but much of the subtlety is lost. It is perhaps fitting, like many of my works, it exists now more as an idea than as the thing itself. Yet, people still find meaning in these fading figures. Perhaps that is enough. There is something I've always wished to ask someone from the future. Did any of my scientific work endure, or am I remembered only for my art?
Both. Your anatomical drawings are studied in medical schools. Your insights about fossils anticipated modern geology. Your notebooks are treasured by scientists and engineers. People even built working models of your machines to prove they would have functioned.
That comforts me greatly. Tell me, which of my scientific studies most influenced your time?
Your sketches show some fascinating machines. What we now call automobiles, self-propelled vehicles that move people without horses, and calculators, mechanical devices that perform mathematical operations automatically, were centuries ahead of your time. Along with your diving equipment designs, do you think any of these inventions could have actually worked with the materials available in your era?
Automobiles and calculators, you say? Remarkable. Some of my inventions could indeed have functioned. Others remained dreams beyond our capabilities. My self-propelled cart, your automobile, would have worked splendidly. It used coiled springs for power with programming gears to control direction. We actually built a working lion automaton for King Francis that could walk and then open its chest to reveal lilies. The king was delighted. My theatrical flying machines, using counterweights and pulleys, successfully carried actors through the air during performances to great applause. My diving apparatus with its leather suit and cane breathing tubes might have worked for shallow depths, though I recognize the problem of water pressure that I could not solve. My ball-bearing designs, screw-cutting machines, and textile devices were all feasible with existing materials, but other designs exceeded our capabilities. My ornithopter, the flapping wing flying machine, required stronger materials and a more powerful energy source than muscle could provide. My calculating device needed precision gears difficult to manufacture with available techniques. My printing press improvements and multi-barreled guns were theoretically sound but practically challenging. I faced the inventor's eternal dilemma, ideas that outpaced implementation. Yet, even impossible machines served a purpose. They stretched imagination, established principles, and planted seeds for future inventors to nurture when new materials and methods became available.
I know you were left-handed, which was unusual then. Did that affect how you worked or how others saw you?
Being mancino, left-handed, shaped my life in countless ways. As a child, attempts were made to correct me as the left hand was associated with sinister intentions. Sinistro itself means both left and unfavorable in Italian. But my father, seeing my early drawings, allowed me this peculiarity. In Verrocchio's workshop, I had to adapt tools made for the right hand. I developed my distinctive mirror writing partly because writing from right to left, my hand would not smudge the ink.... this served the additional purpose of privacy, as few could easily read my notes. In painting, being left-handed gave me a different perspective, literally on light and shadow. Some techniques I invented myself, having no right-handed example to follow. There were whispers of course. Left-handedness was sometimes seen as a mark of deviance or rebellion. Combined with my reluctance to marry, my vegetarian diet, my scientific inquiries, it contributed to a sense that I was somehow outside normal society, yet this outsider perspective proved valuable. It taught me early that conventional wisdom could be questioned, that there might be multiple ways to approach any challenge. Perhaps my greatest works and insights came precisely because I was forced to see the world from a slightly different angle than most.
This landscape is beautiful. I've never seen anything quite like it before.
If you could return to a moment in your own life and make a different choice, would you?
I, I've never really thought about it that way. I suppose I would have started learning earlier about the things that truly interested me, rather than what others expected.
We always wish for different beginnings, don't we? I find myself pondering this often at my age.
If you could start over again knowing what you know now, what would you do differently?
An intriguing question that haunts me in these twilight years. I would be more disciplined in recording and publishing my findings. Too many of my discoveries remained private, lost in notebooks rather than advancing human knowledge. I would choose my patrons more carefully, placing learning above politics, stability over splendor. I would finish the great horse monument in Milan, complete my anatomy treaties, resolve the technical problems with The Last Supper. I would spend less time on war machines and more on designs for human welfare. Perhaps I would have established a true school, not just gathered individual apprentices to ensure my methods survived me. Yet, I cannot truly wish to be other than I was. My meandering path, following curiosity where it led, brought insights I might never have found through more methodical pursuit. My failures taught as much as my successes, and who can say what seemingly minor sketch or observation might yet prove valuable to those who come after? We see our lives as straight lines, but they are more like the branching patterns I studied in trees and rivers, each turn creating new possibilities. I lived the life curiosity demanded of me. That was both my limitation and my glory. Our time grows short, my young friend. Soon, Melzie will come to remind me of dinner with the king. Before you go, what final question would you ask of this old man?
Thank you, Maestro. If you could speak to people centuries ahead, scientists, artists, anyone, what would you tell them?
I would say, cultivate your senses. Look closely, question deeply, cherish wonder. Study the science of art and the art of science. Realize that everything connects to everything else. Do not fear doubt. It is the beginning of wisdom. And remember, learning never exhausts the mind. The world is full of mysteries waiting for your questions.
That's the best advice I've ever heard. Thank you, Maestro Leonardo. I hope I can be even a little like you, curious, brave, and always learning.
Gracie, Leo. Your questions honor me. Take them with you wherever you go, and if you ever find the answer to how the woodpecker's tongue works, send word to this old man.
I can't believe I just spent an afternoon with Leonardo da Vinci. I learned that genius isn't about being perfect. It's about never losing your sense of wonder and always daring to ask the next question. Leonardo showed me that unfinished work isn't failure, but a sign that you're reaching further than most people dream. Whether in art, science, or life, it's the curiosity that counts. So, if you're listening, don't be afraid to start, even if you don't know how you'll finish.
From the sunlit study of close Lucy, Leonardo's story echoes through centuries. His notebooks, paintings, and inventions invite us to look deeper, to connect ideas, to blend art and science. His doubts, struggles, and triumphs remind us that the greatest minds are also the most curious. Until next time, keep seeking, keep questioning, and listen for the echoes through time. (instrumental music plays)